when I was reading that chapter and listening to your lecture
on the set theoretic multiverse, obviously my head went to the
current sort of ongoing debate on the the multiverse theory or the
let's call the interpretation in quantum mechanics or in physics
or I see yeah I'm so because according to my understanding
what you're putting forward with like the set theoretic multiverses
these separate multiverses or let's call it
axiomatic systems for different worlds of set theory
they can still talk to each other whereas I there are still correlations
let's call it whereas I don't think that's the
argument someone like a Sean Carroll would make
when it comes to physics where there's this reality there's another reality
so speaking ontologically are you are you claiming that like
the nature let's say the ontology of mathematics is that
yes there are some universes where the continuum hypothesis
is it works and in some it doesn't do they have relations or are they
completely independent realities if that makes sense
so that's a good question so I guess I have a few things to say about it
so first I think it's probably important to
there's this unfortunate overlap in the term multiverse
there's this whole physical multiverse theory that you were
alluding to which I don't think of as connected at all
with this sort of debate on pluralism in mathematics it's just a totally separate
topic so for example the physical version is connected
with you know superposition of worlds and whether they can interact and so on
and I think that's part of what your question was about
and there are versions of those phenomenon in the set theoretic
multiverse but but I don't think of the set theoretic multiverse as connected
at all with any of those physical theories it's just a different topic
it has you know there's a family resemblance because it's about many
different mathematical worlds and the physical one is about many
different physical worlds but I think that's the end of the
family resemblance and I don't I'm not claiming or
positing any kind of uh deeper connection between the sort of
set theoretic pluralism kinds of multiverse and these physics theories
that talk about a multiverse I think they're just totally different
topics but in terms of whether there's interaction I
think that's extremely and extremely profound philosophical question
on the mathematical side which is where most of my work is
namely so we have these different models of set theory
and the method of forcing and and there is a way
that a one model of set theory can somehow get access to the forcing
extensions because the the the ground model the smaller model
has names for all the individuals that exist in the
forcing extension this is one of the ways that forcing works
we have this concept of having a name and then we have this forcing relation
which tells which expresses in the ground model sort of the
truth conditions of what could be true or might be true in the forcing
extension and this is a degree of access to the extension
and and so it is it like it's not just this kind of pure s5
model situation where we have these totally separate set theoretic worlds
that don't have any connection with one another
and when you move from one another they cannot see each other or
it's not like that at all rather every model of set theory can
look down you know inwardly at the inner models that are defined
inside it for example this is how girdle proved the consistency of ch
he said well take any model of cfc and then inside that model define what's
called the constructible universe which is a kind of
constructible version of the cumulative universe where you only add the bare
minimum at each step you iterate along and whenever you've got a sort of set
that you've built so far then any subset of it that's definable
in that piece you add that at the next level and so you keep
iterating this definable power set operation this was
girdle's uh a genius idea then you get this
inner model of set theory and he proved that all the cfc axioms are true
there including the axiom of choice even if it wasn't true outside
and the continuum hypothesis also and that's how he proved the relative
consistency of the continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice
by showing that inside any model of cfc there's this
deeper model called the constructible universe that satisfies dfc plus ch
and the forcing extension idea is looking sort of
outwardly it's a it's a measure of access that a model has
to the larger models they can't have fully complete access
and one can refute the idea you know there has to
have to be certain kinds of limits but there is some kind of access
and and i find that just fascinating when
the i mean it's a deeply metaphysical
issue about these sort of possible mathematical worlds with different
truths and yet the because these worlds these
mathematical worlds have by by means of the forcing
relation this definable access to these other worlds
they become mathematical questions with precise answers and you can prove
theorems about it and and so it's fascinating when
these deeply philosophical metaphysical mathematical metaphysics
questions turn into mathematical theorems and maybe it comes back to the
first question that you asked me it's really showing the way that these
philosophical issues come directly into the mathematics